APM Runtime Metrics - Upate documentation for the Datadog tracing libraries (#27946)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/metrics/runtime_metrics/_index.md

---
title: Runtime Metrics
aliases:
  - /tracing/advanced/runtime_metrics/
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/dotnet
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/go
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/java
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/nodejs
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/python
  - /tracing//metrics/runtime_metrics/ruby

> description: "Gain additional insights into an application's performance with the runtime metrics associated to your traces."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Gain additional insights into an application's performance with the runtime metrics associated with your traces."
```

## Tracing requirements

| Language | Library Version       | Support Level | Enabled By Default | Generates runtime-id granularity |
|----------|-----------------------|---------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|
| Java     | 0.29.0+               | GA            | Yes                | Yes                              |
| Go       | 1.18.0+               | GA            | No                 | Yes                              |
| .NET     | 1.23.0+               | GA            | No                 | Yes                              |
| Node.js  | 3.0.0+                | GA            | No                 | No                               |
| Ruby     | 0.44.0+               | GA            | No                 | No                               |
| Python   | 0.30.0+               | Preview       | No                 | No                               |
| PHP      | Not supported         |               |                    |                                  |

> | C++      | Not supported         |               |                    |                                  |

Reviewer: I think we should put a dash or "N/A" in the empty cells so users know it's intentionally left blank.

Author: I added N/A in 9bd72afab67387412b3c3fc27eaf80af80540b7e. What do you think?

Reviewer: I think the table looks more complete this way. Thanks!

{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}
You must add the [`dogstatsd-ruby`][100] gem to your Ruby application.

[100]: https://rubygems.org/gems/dogstatsd-ruby
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="dotnet" >}}
#### Supported runtimes
Runtime metrics are only supported on .NET Framework 4.6.1+ and .NET Core 3.1+ (including .NET 5 and newer).

#### Additional permissions for IIS

On .NET Framework, metrics are collected using performance counters. Users in non-interactive logon sessions (that includes IIS application pool accounts and some service accounts) must be added to the **Performance Monitoring Users** group to access counter data.

IIS application pools use special accounts that do not appear in the list of users. To add them to the Performance Monitoring Users group, look for `IIS APPPOOL\<name of the pool>`. For instance, the user for the DefaultAppPool would be `IIS APPPOOL\DefaultAppPool`.

This can be done either from the "Computer Management" UI, or from an administrator command prompt:

```
net localgroup "Performance Monitor Users" "IIS APPPOOL\DefaultAppPool" /add
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Getting started

> ### Configure the Datadog Agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Configure the Datadog Agent
```

> Make sure that [DogStatsD is enabled for the Agent][2]. By default, the Datadog Agent is configured to ingest metrics with UDP over port `8125`. Alternatively, the Datadog Agent can ingest metrics with a Unix Domain Socket (UDS) as an alternative to UDP transport. For more information, read [DogStatsD over Unix Domain Socket][7].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that [DogStatsD is enabled for the Agent][2]. By default, the Datadog Agent is configured to ingest metrics with UDP over port `8125`. Alternatively, the Datadog Agent can ingest metrics with a Unix Domain Socket (UDS) as an alternative to UDP transport. For more information, read [DogStatsD over Unix Domain Socket][7].
```

> For containerized environments, follow the links below to enable DogStatsD metrics collection within the Datadog Agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### Containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### For containerized environments
```

1. Set `dogstatsd_non_local_traffic: true` in your main [`datadog.yaml` configuration file][8], or set the [environment variable][3] `DD_DOGSTATSD_NON_LOCAL_TRAFFIC=true`.

> 2. See the specific setup instructions to ensure that the Agent is configured to receive DogStatsD metrics in a containerized environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Follow these container-specific setup instructions:
```

{{< partial name="apm/apm-runtime-metrics-containers.html" >}}

> </br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br>
```

{{< site-region region="us3,us5,eu,gov,ap1" >}}

> 3. Set `DD_SITE` in the Datadog Agent to {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}} to ensure the Agent sends data to the right Datadog location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Set `DD_SITE` in the Datadog Agent to {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}} to ensure the Agent sends data to the correct Datadog location.
```

{{< /site-region >}}

> ### Configure your application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Configure your application
```

`DD_RUNTIME_METRICS_ENABLED`
: **Default**: `true` for Java, `false` for all other languages <br>
**Description**: Enables the collection of runtime metrics. Metrics are sent to the Datadog agent, as configured for the instrumented application.

`DD_AGENT_HOST`
: **Default**: `localhost` <br>
**Description**: Sets the host address for the tracing library's metric submission. Can be a hostname or an IP address.

`DD_DOGSTATSD_PORT`
: **Default**: `8125` <br>
**Description**: Sets the port for the tracing library's metric submission.

> #### Additional configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Language-specific configuration
```

[3]: https://pkg.go.dev/gopkg.in/DataDog/dd-trace-go.v1/ddtrace/tracer#WithDogstatsdAddress
[9]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-go/v2/ddtrace/tracer#WithDogstatsdAddress
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}
Runtime metrics collection can also be enabled in code by setting the following configuration in your Ruby application:

```ruby
# config/initializers/datadog.rb
require 'datadog/statsd'
require 'datadog' # Use 'ddtrace' if you're using v1.x

Datadog.configure do |c|
  c.runtime_metrics.enabled = true

  # Optionally, you can configure the DogStatsD instance used for sending runtime metrics.
  # DogStatsD is automatically configured with default settings if `dogstatsd-ruby` is available.
  # You can configure with host and port of Datadog agent; defaults to 'localhost:8125'.
  c.runtime_metrics.statsd = Datadog::Statsd.new
end
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="dotnet" >}}
Runtime metrics cannot be enabled in code.
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

> ## Data Collected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data collected
```

See [Runtime Metrics Data Collected][4] for the full list of collected runtime metrics.

## View runtime metric dashboards

> After setup is complete, see your runtime metrics in the instrumented service's details page (see Java example below), the flame graph metrics tab, and in default runtime dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setup is complete, you can view your runtime metrics in:

- The instrumented service's details page
- The flame graph **Metrics** tab
- Default runtime dashboards
```

{{< img src="tracing/runtime_metrics/jvm_runtime_trace.png" alt="JVM Runtime Trace" >}}

> **Notes**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting
```

- To associate runtime metrics within flame graphs, ensure the `env` tag (case-sensitive) is set and matching across your environment.
- For runtime metrics to appear on the service page when using Fargate, ensure that `DD_DOGSTATSD_TAGS` is set on your Agent task, and that the configured `env` tag matches the `env` of the instrumented service.

> ## Further Reading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Further reading
```

{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}
Runtime metrics collection can also be enabled in code by setting the following configuration in your Ruby application:

```ruby
# config/initializers/datadog.rb
require 'datadog/statsd'
require 'datadog' # Use 'ddtrace' if you're using v1.x

Datadog.configure do |c|
  c.runtime_metrics.enabled = true

  # Optionally, you can configure the DogStatsD instance used for sending runtime metrics.
  # DogStatsD is automatically configured with default settings if `dogstatsd-ruby` is available.
  # You can configure with host and port of Datadog agent; defaults to 'localhost:8125'.
  c.runtime_metrics.statsd = Datadog::Statsd.new
end
```
{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="dotnet" >}}
Runtime metrics cannot be enabled in code.
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Data collected

See [Runtime Metrics Data Collected][4] for the full list of collected runtime metrics.

## View runtime metric dashboards

After setup is complete, you can view your runtime metrics in:

- The instrumented service's details page
- The flame graph **Metrics** tab

> - Default runtime dashboards

Reviewer 2: Food for thought - what if we have this link to [all runtime metrics dashboards](https://app.datadoghq.com/dashboard/lists/preset/3?q=runtime%20metrics&p=1)? It seems like the only things we'd need to do to rename it is update a few places from `JVM Metrics` to `JVM Runtime Metrics` so [built-in dashboard](https://github.com/DataDog/dogweb/blob/dfc17f6a73ae5059e536de3852f0526a16161a52/integration/java/apm_jvm_dashboard.json#L2) and [link to built-in dashboard](https://github.com/DataDog/web-ui/blob/0046f320b521350b3c5f75716cf090931554a08d/packages/apps/service-observability/lib/metrics/runtime-metrics.utils.ts#L14)

Author: I think that's a great idea. I'd say let's add the link once we make the corresponding changes to the JVM dashboards so we don't create any confusion for users

## Tracing requirements

| Language | Library Version       | Support Level | Enabled By Default | Generates runtime-id granularity |
|----------|-----------------------|---------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|
| Java     | 0.29.0+               | GA            | Yes                | Yes                              |
| Go       | 1.18.0+               | GA            | No                 | Yes                              |
| .NET     | 1.23.0+               | GA            | No                 | Yes                              |
| Node.js  | 3.0.0+                | GA            | No                 | No                               |
| Ruby     | 0.44.0+               | GA            | No                 | No                               |
| Python   | 0.30.0+               | Preview       | No                 | No                               |
| PHP      | Not supported         |               |                    |                                  |
| C++      | Not supported         |               |                    |                                  |

### Caveats

{{< tabs >}}

{{% tab "Java" %}}

#### Supported runtimes

> Runtime metrics are only supported on Java 8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Runtime metrics are only supported on Java 8+.
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Ruby" %}}

> You must add the [`dogstatsd-ruby`][1] gem to your Ruby application.

Reviewer 2: For some reason this link isn't rendering properly
<img width="533" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/978b3f79-e9fd-4743-8dc6-347c9d9e7e29" />

IIS application pools use special accounts that do not appear in the list of users. To add them to the Performance Monitoring Users group, look for `IIS APPPOOL\<name of the pool>`. For instance, the user for the DefaultAppPool would be `IIS APPPOOL\DefaultAppPool`.

This can be done either from the "Computer Management" UI, or from an administrator command prompt:

```
net localgroup "Performance Monitor Users" "IIS APPPOOL\DefaultAppPool" /add
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Getting started

### Configure the Datadog Agent

Make sure that [DogStatsD is enabled for the Agent][2]. By default, the Datadog Agent is configured to ingest metrics with UDP over port `8125`. Alternatively, the Datadog Agent can ingest metrics with a Unix Domain Socket (UDS) as an alternative to UDP transport. For more information, read [DogStatsD over Unix Domain Socket][7].

For containerized environments, follow the links below to enable DogStatsD metrics collection within the Datadog Agent.

#### Containers

> 1. Set `dogstatsd_non_local_traffic: true` in your main [`datadog.yaml` configuration file][8], or set the [environment variable][3] `DD_DOGSTATSD_NON_LOCAL_TRAFFIC=true`.

Author: Added in 9bd72afab67387412b3c3fc27eaf80af80540b7e. Let's wait for the preview link to verify that the link works as expected
